.TH LA_TIME 3 "March 2026" "libAES67" "Library Functions Manual"
.SH NAME
.B la_time_get, la_time_getres, la_time_sleep, la_time_sleep_until,
.B la_time_conv, la_time_normalize, la_time_add, la_time_sub, la_time_cmp,
.B la_time_to_ns, la_time_from_ns, la_time_to_ptp, la_time_to_rtp,
.B la_time_to_double, la_time_from_double, la_time_from_ptp
\(em time and clock utilities for libAES67

.SH LIBRARY
libAES67 C Library (libAES67)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <libAES67/time.h>

.I int
.BI "la_time_get(" "la_time_t *xtp, const la_clock_t clock_type" );

.I int
.BI "la_time_getres(" "la_time_t *res, const la_clock_t clock_type" );

.I int
.BI "la_time_sleep(" "const la_time_t *duration" );

.I int
.BI "la_time_sleep_until(" "const la_time_t *target, const la_clock_t clock_type" );

.I int
.BI "la_time_conv(" "la_time_t *dst, const la_clock_t dst_clock_type, const la_time_t *src, const la_clock_t src_clock_type" );

.I int
.BI "la_time_normalize(" "la_time_t *xtp" );

.I int
.BI "la_time_add(" "la_time_t *dst, const la_time_t *lhs, const la_time_t *rhs" );

.I int
.BI "la_time_sub(" "la_time_t *dst, const la_time_t *lhs, const la_time_t *rhs" );

.I int
.BI "la_time_cmp(" "const la_time_t *lhs, const la_time_t *rhs" );

.I uint64_t
.BI "la_time_to_ns(" "const la_time_t *time" );

.I void
.BI "la_time_from_ns(" "la_time_t *time, uint64_t ns" );

.I uint64_t
.BI "la_time_to_ptp(" "const la_time_t *time" );

.I uint32_t
.BI "la_time_to_rtp(" "const la_time_t *time, uint32_t rate" );

.I double
.BI "la_time_to_double(" "const la_time_t *time" );

.I void
.BI "la_time_from_double(" "la_time_t *time, double secs" );

.I void
.BI "la_time_from_ptp(" "la_time_t *time, uint64_t ptpns" );
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION

The functions in this interface operate on objects of type \fBla_time_t\fR,
which represent time relative to a reference epoch.  A time value consists
of a count of seconds and nanoseconds together with additional fields for
minutes, hours, and days.

Time values are represented by:

.nf
typedef struct {
    int_fast64_t sec;
    int_fast32_t nsec;
    int_fast32_t min;
    int_fast32_t hour;
    int_fast32_t day;
} la_time_t;
.fi

The fields of a \fBla_time_t\fR are expected to remain within their normal
ranges.   In particular, nanoseconds lie in the interval 0 to 999,999,999,
seconds in 0 to 59, minutes in 0 to 59, and hours in 0 to 23.  If a field
falls outside its range, \fBla_time_normalize()\fR adjusts the structure by
propagating carry or borrow to adjacent fields.

All time values are interpreted with respect to a clock source.  The type
\fBla_clock_t\fR identifies the clock used for a given operation.  Clocks
that represent real time (such as UTC, TAI, and PTP) advance according to
a global timescale, while monotonic and CPU-time clocks measure elapsed
time relative to an unspecified starting point.

.TP
.B LA_CLOCK_UTC
Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) counting non-leap seconds since the epoch.

.TP
.B LA_CLOCK_TAI
International Atomic Time (TAI) counting continuous SI seconds.

.TP
.B LA_CLOCK_MONOTONIC
Monotonic system clock unaffected by system time adjustments.

.TP
.B LA_CLOCK_PROCESS
CPU time consumed by the current process.

.TP
.B LA_CLOCK_THREAD
CPU time consumed by the current thread.

.TP
.B LA_CLOCK_PTP
IEEE 1588-2002 Precision Time Protocol clock.

.TP
.B LA_CLOCK_PTPv2
IEEE 1588-2008 Precision Time Protocol V2 clock.

.LP
The \fBla_time_get()\fR function obtains the current value of the specified
clock and stores it in the object pointed to by \fIxtp\fR.  The function
\fBla_time_getres()\fR obtains the resolution of that clock, expressed as
the smallest distinguishable interval.

The \fBla_time_sleep()\fR function suspends execution for the interval
specified by \fIduration\fR.  If the call is interrupted by a signal, the
remaining interval is recomputed and the sleep is resumed.  The function
\fBla_time_sleep_until()\fR suspends execution until the time specified by
\fItarget\fR is reached; if that time lies in the past, the function returns
without sleeping.

The functions \fBla_time_add()\fR and \fBla_time_sub()\fR perform arithmetic
on time values.  Addition propagates carry from nanoseconds through days
as required.  Subtraction propagates borrow in the opposite direction and
fails if the result would be negative.  The function \fBla_time_cmp()\fR
compares two values by examining fields in order of decreasing significance,
beginning with days and ending with nanoseconds.

The \fBla_time_conv()\fR function converts a time value from one clock
domain to another.  When both clocks represent real time, the conversion
applies the required offset between the corresponding timescales.  This
includes the adjustment between UTC and TAI.  Conversions between real-time
clocks and relative clocks are not defined and fail.

The function \fBla_time_normalize()\fR adjusts a time value so that all
fields fall within their canonical ranges.

The functions \fBla_time_to_ns()\fR and \fBla_time_from_ns()\fR convert
between a \fBla_time_t\fR and a scalar representation in nanoseconds.
The functions \fBla_time_to_double()\fR and \fBla_time_from_double()\fR
perform the same conversion using seconds in double precision.

The functions \fBla_time_to_ptp()\fR and \fBla_time_from_ptp()\fR convert
between \fBla_time_t\fR values and PTP timestamps.  The function
\fBla_time_to_rtp()\fR derives an RTP timestamp from a time value using
the specified clock rate.

.SH RETURN VALUES

The functions \fBla_time_get()\fR, \fBla_time_getres()\fR,
\fBla_time_sleep()\fR, \fBla_time_sleep_until()\fR,
\fBla_time_conv()\fR, \fBla_time_normalize()\fR,
\fBla_time_add()\fR, and \fBla_time_sub()\fR return 0 on success
and -1 on error.

The function \fBla_time_cmp()\fR returns -1 if the first argument
is less than the second, 0 if they are equal, and 1 if the first
is greater than the second.  If an invalid argument is supplied,
the result is undefined.

The function \fBla_time_to_ns()\fR returns the total number of
nanoseconds represented by the given time value.

The function \fBla_time_to_ptp()\fR returns the corresponding PTP
timestamp expressed in nanoseconds.

The function \fBla_time_to_rtp()\fR returns an RTP timestamp derived
from the given time value and clock rate.

The function \fBla_time_to_double()\fR returns the time value
expressed as seconds in double precision.

The functions \fBla_time_from_ns()\fR, \fBla_time_from_double()\fR,
and \fBla_time_from_ptp()\fR do not return a value.

.SH ERRORS

.TP
.B EINVAL
An unsupported or unknown clock type was specified, or a conversion
between incompatible clock types was requested.

.TP
.B EFAULT
A NULL pointer was supplied.

.TP
.B EINTR
A sleep operation was interrupted by a signal.

.SH SEE ALSO

date(1), clock_gettime(2), la_ptp(3), la_time_conv(3), time(3)

.SH STANDARDS

IEEE 1588-2002, IEEE 1588-2008, POSIX.1-2008
